Add documentation for noEncap and hybrid modes, and kube-router (#1798)
vmware-tanzu/antrea: docs/noencap-hybrid-modes.md

the Node network routers. For example, Antrea can work with [kube-router](https://www.kube-router.io)
and leverage kube-router to advertise Pod CIDRs to routers using BGP. Section
[Using kube-router for BGP](#using-kube-router-for-bgp) describes how to
configure Antrea and kube-router to work together.

When the Node network can support forwarding and routing of Pod traffic, Antrea
can be configured to run in the `NoEncap` mode, by setting the `trafficEncapMode`
config option of `antrea-agent` to `noEncap`. By default, Antrea performs SNAT
(source network address translation) for the outbound connections from a Pod to
outside of the Pod network, using the Node's IP address as the SNAT IP. In the
`NoEncap` mode, as the Node network knows about Pod IP addresses, the SNAT by
Antrea might be unnecessary. In this case, you can disable it by setting the
`noSNAT` config option to `true`. The `trafficEncapMode` and `noSNAT` config
options are defined in `antrea-agent.conf` of the `antrea` ConfigMap in the
[Antrea deployment YAML](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/antrea/blob/main/build/yamls/antrea.yml).

```yaml
  antrea-agent.conf: |
    ... ...
    trafficEncapMode: noEncap

>     noSNAT: false

Reviewer: ```
    noSNAT: false # or true to disable Antrea SNAT for external traffic
```

>     #noSNAT: false

Reviewer: I think you mean `noSNAT: true`?

Author: I wanted to show the default value, but yes it seems confusing. Changed to: noSNAT: false.

# NoEncap and Hybrid Traffic Modes of Antrea

Besides the default `Encap` mode, in which Pod traffic across Nodes will be
encapsulated and sent over tunnels, Antrea also supports `NoEncap` and `Hybrid`
traffic modes. In `NoEncap` mode, Antrea does not encapsulate Pod traffic, but
relies on the Node network to route the traffic across Nodes. In `Hybrid` mode,
Antrea encapsulates Pod traffic when the source Node and the destination Node
are in different subnets, but does not encapsulate when the source and the
destination Nodes are in the same subnet. This document describes how to
configure Antrea with the `NoEncap` and `Hybrid` modes.

## Hybrid Mode

Let us start from `Hybrid` mode which is simpler to configure. `Hybrid` mode
does not encapsulate Pod traffic when the source and the destination Nodes are
in the same subnet. Thus it requires the Node network allow Pod IP addresses

> being sent out from the Nodes' NICs. This requirement is not supported in all

Reviewer: it requires the Node network to allow Pod IP addresses to be sent out

or

it requires that the Node network allow Pod IP addresses to be sent out

Author: Updated.

the networks and clouds, or in some cases it might require specific
configuration of the Node network. For example:

* On AWS, the source/destination checks must be disabled on the EC2 instances of
the Kubernetes Nodes, as described in the
[AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/userguide/VPC_NAT_Instance.html#EIP_Disable_SrcDestCheck).

* On Google Compute Engine, IP forwarding must be enabled on the VM instances as
described in the [Google Cloud documentation](https://cloud.google.com/vpc/docs/using-routes#canipforward).

* On Azure, there is no way to let VNet forward unknown IPs, hence Antrea
`Hybrid` mode cannot work on Azure.

If the Node network does allow Pod IPs sent out from the Nodes, you can
configure Antrea to run in the `Hybrid` mode by setting the `trafficEncapMode`
config option of `antrea-agent` to `hybrid`. The `trafficEncapMode` config
option is defined in `antrea-agent.conf` of the `antrea` ConfigMap in the
[Antrea deployment YAML](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/antrea/blob/main/build/yamls/antrea.yml).

> ```yaml

Reviewer: maybe we should not include this snippet unless there is a strong reason to, as then we will need to keep it in sync I feel like the instructions above are clear enough.

Author: What you think about:
```
```yaml
trafficEncapMode: noEncap
...
```

Reviewer: second one looks good to me

  antrea-agent.conf: |
    ... ...
    # Determines how traffic is encapsulated. It has the following options:
    # encap(default):    Inter-node Pod traffic is always encapsulated and Pod to external network
    #                    traffic is SNAT'd.
    # noEncap:           Inter-node Pod traffic is not encapsulated; Pod to external network traffic is
    #                    SNAT'd if noSNAT is not set to true. Underlying network must be capable of
    #                    supporting Pod traffic across IP subnets.
    # hybrid:            noEncap if source and destination Nodes are on the same subnet, otherwise encap.
    # networkPolicyOnly: Antrea enforces NetworkPolicy only, and utilizes CNI chaining and delegates Pod
    #                    IPAM and connectivity to the primary CNI.
    #
    trafficEncapMode: hybrid
    ... ...
```

> After changing the option, you can deploy Antrea with the `Hybrid` mode by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After changing the configuration option, you can deploy Antrea in `Hybrid` mode with the usual command:
```

Author: Updated.

```bash
kubectl apply -f antrea.yml
```

## NoEncap Mode

In `NoEncap` mode, Antrea never encapsulates Pod traffic. Just like `Hybrid`
mode, the Node network needs to allow Pod IP addresses sent out from Nodes. When
the Nodes are not in the same subnet, `NoEncap` mode additionally requires the
Node network be able to route the Pod traffic from the source Node to the
destination Node. There are two possibilities to enable this routing by Node
network:

* Leverage Route Controller of [Kubernetes Cloud Controller Manager](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/running-cloud-controller).
The Kubernetes Cloud Providers that implement Route Controller can add routes
to the cloud network routers for the Pod CIDRs of Nodes, and then the cloud
network is able to route Pod traffic between Nodes. This Route Controller
functionality is supported by the Cloud Provider implementations of the major

> clouds, including: [AWS](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/staging/src/k8s.io/legacy-cloud-providers/aws),

Author: Did not find documentations for how to configure cloud providers. Probably we need more work to figure out how to configure each of them.

Reviewer: For in-tree providers, as far as I know, the `--configure-cloud-routes` flag for `kube-controller-manager` needs to be set to `true`. I am not aware of any other requirement. At the moment, the flag also requires `--allocate-node-cidrs`, but that's a requirement for Antrea anyway.

I believe the flag will work for Azure, GCP, AWS. I don't know about vSphere though, maybe @dantingl knows.

Author: Yes, I know --configure-cloud-routes, but there can be other requirements depending on the clouds. For example, Azure seems require a separate routing table being created.

Author: I do not want to talk about NSX-T configuration here - there will be lots of details (T1, etc.) to talk. Hopefully Danting can enhance vSphere CP documentation for route configuration, then we can just put a link here.

Reviewer: I see, there is the `--cloud-config` flag that takes an arbitrary configuration file, which is cloud-specific.

* Run a routing protocol or even manually configure routers to add routes to
the Node network routers. For example, Antrea can work with [kube-router](https://www.kube-router.io)
and leverage kube-router to advertise Pod CIDRs to routers using BGP. Section
[Using kube-router for BGP](#using-kube-router-for-bgp) describes how to
configure Antrea and kube-router to work together.

When the Node network can support forwarding and routing of Pod traffic, Antrea
can be configured to run in the `NoEncap` mode, by setting the `trafficEncapMode`
config option of `antrea-agent` to `noEncap`. By default, Antrea performs SNAT
(source network address translation) for the outbound connections from a Pod to
outside of the Pod network, using the Node's IP address as the SNAT IP. In the
`NoEncap` mode, as the Node network knows about Pod IP addresses, the SNAT by
Antrea might be unnecessary. In this case, you can disable it by setting the
`noSNAT` config option to `true`. The `trafficEncapMode` and `noSNAT` config
options are defined in `antrea-agent.conf` of the `antrea` ConfigMap in the
[Antrea deployment YAML](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/antrea/blob/main/build/yamls/antrea.yml).

> ```yaml

Reviewer: same comment as above

    #                    traffic is SNAT'd.
    # noEncap:           Inter-node Pod traffic is not encapsulated; Pod to external network traffic is
    #                    SNAT'd if noSNAT is not set to true. Underlying network must be capable of
    #                    supporting Pod traffic across IP subnets.
    # hybrid:            noEncap if source and destination Nodes are on the same subnet, otherwise encap.
    # networkPolicyOnly: Antrea enforces NetworkPolicy only, and utilizes CNI chaining and delegates Pod
    #                    IPAM and connectivity to the primary CNI.
    #
    trafficEncapMode: noEncap

    # Whether or not to SNAT (using the Node IP) the egress traffic from a Pod to the external network.
    # This option is for the noEncap traffic mode only, and the default value is false. In the noEncap
    # mode, if the cluster's Pod CIDR is reachable from the external network, then the Pod traffic to
    # the external network needs not be SNAT'd. In the networkPolicyOnly mode, antrea-agent never
    # performs SNAT and this option will be ignored; for other modes it must be set to false.
    #noSNAT: false
    ... ...
```

> After changing the options, you can deploy Antrea with the `noEncap` mode by

Reviewer: deploy Antrea in `NoEncap` mode by ...

Author: Done

applying the deployment YAML.

### Using kube-router for BGP

> We can run kube-router in the advertisement-only mode to advertise Pod CIDRs to

Reviewer: s/in the advertisement-only mode/in advertisement-only mode

Author: Done

the peered routers, so the routers can know how to route Pod traffic to the

> Nodes. To deploy kube-router in the advertisement-only, first download the

Reviewer: To deploy kube-router in advertisement-only mode

Author: Done.

[kube-router DaemonSet template](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cloudnativelabs/kube-router/v0.4.0/daemonset/generic-kuberouter-only-advertise-routes.yaml):

```bash
curl -LO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cloudnativelabs/kube-router/v0.4.0/daemonset/generic-kuberouter-only-advertise-routes.yaml
```

Then edit the YAML file and set the following kube-router arguments:

```yaml
- "--run-router=true"
- "--run-firewall=false"
- "--run-service-proxy=false"
- "--enable-cni=false"
- "--enable-ibgp=false"
- "--enable-overlay=false"
- "--enable-pod-egress=false"
- "--peer-router-ips=<CHANGE ME>"
- "--peer-router-asns=<CHANGE ME>"
```

The BGP peers should be configured by specifying the --peer-router-asns and

> --peer-router-ips parameters. Note, the ASNs and IPs must match the

Reviewer: nit: use back ticks around `--peer-router-asns` and `--peer-router-ips`

Author: Done.

configuration on the peered routers. For example:

```yaml
- "--peer-router-ips=192.168.1.99,192.168.1.100
- "--peer-router-asns=65000,65000"
```

> Then you can deploy the kube-router DaemonSet by:

Reviewer: s/by/with

Author: Done

```bash
kubectl apply -f generic-kuberouter-only-advertise-routes.yaml
```

> You can verify the kube-router Pods are running on the Nodes of your Kubernetes

Reviewer: verify that the kube-router Pods

Author: Done

cluster by (the cluster in the following example has only two Nodes):

```bash
$ kubectl -n kube-system get pods -l k8s-app=kube-router
NAME                READY     STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
kube-router-rn4xc   1/1       Running   0          1m
kube-router-vhrf5   1/1       Running   0          1m
```

Antrea can be deployed either before or after kube-router, with the `NoEncap`

> mode.

Reviewer: s/with the `NoEncap` mode/in `NoEncap` mode

Author: Done
